## Conclusion

In this review, we have described many of the major recent advances in network-based methods for multiomic data integration.
Networks are natural representations of many types of biological and biomedical data, and they can be very effectively leveraged for integrative analyses.

Unsupervised methods attempt to integrate data for the purposes of feature reduction, de-noising, clustering, stratification, and future prediction methods.
Another application which is particularly relevant to unsupervised network methods is the identification of functional modules (or sub-networks) that correspond to biologically-meaningful functional units.
Significant conceptual advances include the creation of networks in which nodes have unconventional meaning, such as bacterial growth conditions or patients themselves.
Unsupervised integrative analyses have also shown their power for the prioritization (or re-prioritization) of molecular entities according to their potential influence on phenotype.

An intriguing future direction of research involves the application of novel network methods to integrated omics networks.
For example, Tan et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2017.06.003] used an ensemble of unsupervised methods to extract molecular signatures from gene expression data.
The authors employed an ensemble of denoising autoencoders to extract stable molecular signatures from the highly over-parametrized model.
Similar ensemble-of-unsupervised approaches could be applied to integrate multi-modal omics data.

Supervised methods attempt to harness multifarious data to make biological or clinical predictions.
While supervised methods lend themselves less naturally to the practice of data integration, many unsupervised methods return integrated data which is particularly amenable to supervised prediction.
A major future advancement in this field will undoubtedly involve the association of outcome labels with multiomics data of a massive scale.
Specifically, the integration of omics data with electronic medical records (EMR) could lead to the creation and availability of huge data sets alongside information about disease, treatment, and response.
Such an integration is one of the most promising avenues for future work in this field, and it would lay the path for significant future discovery.
Among the many types of research that such integration would allow, empirically derived "deep phenotypes" are some of the most exciting possibilities.
